[Kibana]: Rename ES|QL controls to Variable controls (#3334)
elastic/docs-content: explore-analyze/dashboards/add-controls.md

10. Save the dashboard.
::::
:::::

## Add time slider controls [add-time-slider-controls]

:::::{applies-switch}
::::{applies-item} stack: ga 9.2
You can add one interactive time slider control to a dashboard.

1. Open or create a new dashboard.
2. In **Edit** mode, select **Add** > **Controls** > **Time slider control**.
3. The time slider control uses the time range from the global time filter. To change the time range in the time slider control, [change the global time filter](../query-filter/filtering.md).
4. Save the dashboard. The control can now be used.
::::
::::{applies-item} stack: ga 9.0
You can add one interactive time slider control to a dashboard.

1. Open or create a new dashboard.
2. In **Edit** mode, select **Controls** > **Add time slider control**.
3. The time slider control uses the time range from the global time filter. To change the time range in the time slider control, [change the global time filter](../query-filter/filtering.md).
4. Save the dashboard. The control can now be used.
::::
:::::

> ## Add {{esql}} or variable controls [add-esql-control]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Add variable controls [add-esql-control]
```

:::{note}
In versions 9.0 and 9.1, variable controls were called {{esql}} controls.
:::
An idea as discussed

    * **Minimum width**: How much horizontal space does the control occupies. The final width can vary depending on the other controls and their own width setting.
    * **Expand width to fit available space**: Expand the width of the control to fit the available horizontal space on the dashboard.

7. Specify the additional settings:

    * For Options lists:

        * Define whether users can select multiple values to filter with the control, or only one.
        * For Options list controls on *string* and *IP address* type fields, you can define how the control’s embedded search should behave:

            * **Prefix**: Show options that *start with* the entered value.
            * **Contains**: Show options that *contain* the entered value. This setting option is only available for *string* type fields. Results can take longer to show with this option.
            * **Exact**: Show options that are a 100% match with the entered value.

              ::::{tip}
              The search is not case sensitive. For example, searching for `ios` would still retrieve `iOS` if that value exists.
              ::::

>         * **Ignore timeout for results** delays the display of the list of values to when it is fully loaded. This option is useful for large data sets, to avoid missing some available options in case they take longer to load and appear when using the control.

Author: colon shouldn't be bold I guess

    * For Range sliders, set the step size. The step size determines the number of steps of the slider. The smaller the step size is, the more steps there is in the slider.

8. Select **Save**. The control can now be used.

> 9. Consider the position of the control if you have several controls active on the dashboard. Controls are applied from left to right, which can change the options available depending on their position when the [Chain controls](#configure-controls-settings) setting is enabled.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
9. Consider the position of the control if you have several controls active on the dashboard. When the [Chain controls](#configure-controls-settings) setting is enabled, controls are applied from left to right, which can change the available options based on their position.
```
It wasn't clear if the left-to-right behavior was only applicable when chain controls is enabled. But I think that's the case, right?

You can add one interactive time slider control to a dashboard.

1. Open or create a new dashboard.
2. In **Edit** mode, select **Add** > **Controls** > **Time slider control**.
3. The time slider control uses the time range from the global time filter. To change the time range in the time slider control, [change the global time filter](../query-filter/filtering.md).
4. Save the dashboard. The control can now be used.

## Add variable controls [add-variable-control]

You can bind controls to your {{esql}} visualizations in dashboards. When creating an {{esql}} visualization, the autocomplete suggestions prompt control insertion for field values, field names, function configuration, and function names. Variable controls act as variables in your {{esql}} visualization queries.

This enables controls that only apply to specific panels in your dashboards, and exposes visualization configuration such as date histogram interval controls to dashboard users.

:::{note}
Only **Options lists** are supported for variable controls. Options can be:
- values or fields that can be static or defined by a query
- functions {applies_to}`stack: ga 9.1`
:::

> 1. Use one of the following options to start creating a variable control:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. To start creating a variable control, do one of the following:
```

   - In **Edit** mode, select **Add** > **Controls** > **Variable control** in the toolbar.
   - On the **Create variable control** flyout, while editing your {{esql}} visualization's query, the autocomplete menu suggests adding a control when relevant or when typing `?` in the query.

   ![ESQL query prompting to add a control](/explore-analyze/images/esql-visualization-control-suggestion.png)

2. A menu opens to let you configure the control. This is where you can specify:

    * The type of the control. 

>       * For controls with **Static values**, you select the options available in the controls by entering them manually or by using a dropdown listing available values. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      * For controls with **Static values**, select the options by entering them manually or by using the dropdown that lists available values. 
```

>       * For controls with **Values from a query**, you write an {{esql}} query to populate the list of options.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      * For controls with **Values from a query**, write an {{esql}} query to populate the list of options.
```

    * The name of the control. This name is used to reference the control in {{esql}} queries. 
      * Start the name with `?` if you want the options to be simple static values.
      * Start the name with `??` if you want the options of the control to be fields or functions. {applies_to}`stack: ga 9.1`

>     * Values available to select for users with this control. You can add multiple values from suggested fields, or type in custom values. If you selected **Values from a query**, you must instead write an {{esql}} query at this step.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    * The values users can select for this control. You can add multiple values from suggested fields, or type in custom values. If you selected **Values from a query**, you must instead write an {{esql}} query at this step.
```
More similar to other bullet points this way.

    * The width of the control.

    ![ESQL control settings](/explore-analyze/images/esql-visualization-control-settings.png "title =50%")

3. Save the control. 

The panel closes and the control is added to the dashboard.
If you added it by starting from a query, the control is directly inserted in that query and you can continue editing it.

You can then insert it in any other {{esql}} visualization queries by typing the control's name.

**Examples**

* Integrate filtering into your {{esql}} experience

  ```esql
  | WHERE field == ?value
  ```

* Fields in controls for dynamic group by

  ```esql
  | STATS count=COUNT(*) BY ?field
  ```

* Variable time ranges? Bind function configuration settings to a control

  ```esql
  | BUCKET(@timestamp, ?interval),
  ```

* Make the function itself dynamic

  ```esql
  | STATS metric = ?function
  ```

![Editing {{esql}} controls from a dashboard](https://images.contentstack.io/v3/assets/bltefdd0b53724fa2ce/blte42dfaa404bfc2d6/67d2e31e2e4dc59da190d78f/dashboard-esql-controls.gif)

## Configure the controls settings [configure-controls-settings]

> Several settings that apply to all controls of the same dashboard are available.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Several settings apply to all controls that are part of a dashboard.
```

> 1. In **Edit** mode, select **Add** > **Controls** > **Settings** in the toolbar..

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. In **Edit** mode, select **Add** > **Controls** > **Settings** in the toolbar.
```

2. On the **Control settings** flyout, configure the following settings:

>     * **Label position** — Specify where the control label appears.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    * **Label position**: Specify where the control label appears.
```
Maybe : here since the next bullet uses it too?
